the mariana trench in the western
pacific ocean
is the deepest place on our planet if
you throw a rock into the water
it'll travel 36 000 feet before touching
the bottom
but unlike your body the rock won't
experience
any unpleasant consequences after all it
doesn't get affected by all that immense
pressure that builds up the deeper you
go but then
what would happen to your body at the
very bottom of the mariana trench
put on your flippers it's time to dive
hold your breath you're five feet below
the surface
and it's still pretty comfortable down
there you're used to this depth
you go that deep when diving in the pool
or maybe at the beach
when watching exotic fish swimming near
the bottom
but you're serious about reaching the
deepest point of the mariana trench
the challenger deep so you keep going
32 feet that's where you start to feel
some discomfort
here the pressure pushing down on your
body has doubled
your ears and lungs feel a little sore
this is because
people have many air pockets in their
bodies
and under pressure these pockets shrink
in volume
and you can feel it but don't worry your
organs aren't made of metal
they're flexible enough to withstand
even more pressure than that
what you should worry about at this
depth is the white shark if
it wants you for dinner you're in worse
trouble than high pressure
that's why you'd better keep diving
around 65 feet underwater
that's where you'll need a flashlight
and air tanks as you're running out of
breath
the sun's rays barely reach here and
it's pretty dark
for the same reason you're getting cold
how about putting on a thermal suit
which is what divers usually wear ah
it's better now but even though you feel
warmer
your ears are starting to hurt a lot
and your lungs have shrunk almost three
times their normal size
this can be risky for an untrained diver
but you're brave enough and now you're
already at a depth of 100 feet
only professional divers go that deep
without special equipment
the pressure here is three times higher
than what you experience on the surface
something weird starts happening to your
body it's not like
anything you've ever felt before and the
reason is
your air tank the compressed air inside
is mostly nitrogen
78 and oxygen around 21
but that deep down nitrogen becomes kind
of toxic
it can make you do strange things like
you may forget you're under water
and pull off your oxygen mask but if you
take tanks with more oxygen in them
the dizziness and other strange
sensations will pass
200 feet below the surface the pressure
here is seven times higher than on dry
land
now even the oxygen becomes unsafe to
you
you have to breathe some gas with helium
in it
a sharp drop to a depth of 700 feet
this mark is the world record in free
diving
herbert niche once managed to reach that
deep without
any special equipment or air tanks after
that
he received the title of the deepest man
on earth
in 2012 he tried to break his own record
and plunged to a depth of 830 feet
but it didn't end well for his health
anyway if you trained to hold your
breath for that long
you would probably have very few
problems now
that deep down you need to start looking
around again
because there can be heavy traffic
submarines travel at this depth and you
sure don't want to collide with one of
them
a few more feet deeper and you've
reached the limits of the average
human's body
at the same time laboratory experiments
have proven
that people can withstand even higher
pressure
it went like this a diver entered a
special chamber the size of a room
scientists simulated high pressure
comparable to a deep dive
inside this chamber this way the
researchers discovered that a trained
person
can withstand the pressure similar to
that at a depth of sixteen hundred feet
but the diver couldn't just walk out of
the chamber after the experiment was
over
at high pressure nitrogen helium and
other gases build up in the body
and if you normalize the pressure at
once those gases form into bubbles
the consequences are extremely
unpleasant to say the least
so you have to do a gradual ascent from
this depth
this way the gases can leave your body
in a natural way
sometimes a dive takes a few minutes but
coming to the surface
stretches for many hours it's all about
safety
okay now you have to put on a special
suit
otherwise you won't be able to dive any
deeper
it can protect you at a depth of up to
2300 feet
the suit's sealed and the pressure
inside is exactly the same
as on the surface but all too soon
the suit's protection isn't enough
anymore you need a new means to continue
your descent
and that's the triton 6600 submarine
now that you're sitting inside a large
iron machine you feel as if you're
driving a car
only this vehicle is worth 5.5 million
dollars
you certainly don't want to smash it so
be careful
you've reached a depth of 6 600 feet
don't even think about getting out of
the submarine
the pressure here is 200 times greater
than on the surface
your body just won't survive this
experience
there's still almost 30 000 feet to the
bottom of the mariana trench
if you teleported right there a huge
column of water nearly seven miles high
would press down on you with all its
force your sightseeing tour would be
over before it began even pressurized
submarines can't withstand that kind of
force
large metal machines just burst like air
balloons
at the moment people only explore the
bottom of the mariana trench
with the help of robots and drones one
such machine
is narius this is an autonomous
underwater vehicle that was built
specifically for deep sea diving
it can withstand pressures one thousand
times greater
than those on the surface and reach a
depth of nearly 36
000 feet in may 2009
nerius got to the bottom of the
challenger deep the deepest known point
on our planet
thanks to this machine and its two
cameras people could watch what was
going on
at that enormous depth but people have
also set foot in the challenger deep
back in 1960 the trieste bath escape
descended to its bottom
the vessel was carrying two crew members
unfortunately
they couldn't see their surroundings
well there was only one small window in
the bath escape
it helped the structure of the ship
remain strong plus
to withstand the incredible pressure the
iron walls of the bath escape
were five inches thick but when the
explorers reached the ocean floor
in the challenger deep one of the
windows panes did crack
luckily the ship was still able to spend
about 20 minutes at the bottom of the
ocean and then rise to the surface but
there are living creatures that are used
to such incredible conditions
the mariana snailfish for example lives
at a depth of 24 000 feet
even the bottom of the mariana trench is
inhabited
bacteria and viruses live there they're
used to low temperatures and high
pressure
and their food is all kinds of organic
matter that sinks to the bottom of the
ocean
people can also survive in other extreme
conditions
for example in space it's a vacuum
unlike what many people believe it's not
cold
it's also not as dense as air or water
that's why you'd lose your body heat
very slowly
but you can do an experiment normally
water boils at 212 degrees fahrenheit
let's say you place a glass of water in
a special chamber
and gradually lower the pressure the
lower it is
the lower temperature the water needs to
boil you're
70 water and since space is an
almost absolute vacuum the pressure
there is extremely low
near zero and now think about what can
happen with your very liquid blood
i believe you can imagine the
consequences
ouch also your internal organs would
begin to expand
but that's not a problem your tissues
are flexible
and can withstand such an experience the
main
issue would be the lack of oxygen
without air
you'd soon lose consciousness and still
if the rescue team could get to you
within one to two minutes
you'd be fine but there are living
organisms that can survive
even there one bacterial species was
thriving in outer space
near the international space station for
three years
these bacteria don't mind the vacuum and
the lack of oxygen
they've even managed to survive strong
solar radiation
they rightfully deserve the title of the
world's most resistant bacteria